ARC-86 xGov Committee (#345)
algorandfoundation/ARCs: ARCs/arc-0086.md

### xGov Status

xGovs, or Expert Governors, are decision makers in the Algorand Expert Governance, who acquire voting power by demonstrating an enduring commitment to the Algorand ecosystem, and whose interests are aligned with the common good of the Algorand blockchain.

These individuals can participate in the designation and approval of proposals submitted to the Algorand Expert Governance process.

An xGov is associated with an Algorand Address subscribing to the Algorand Expert Governance by acknowledging the xGov Registry (Application ID: _TBD_).

Once the xGov Registry confirms the acknowledgement, the xGov is eligible to acquire _voting power_.

### xGov Voting Power

The _voting power_ assigned to each xGov is equal to the number of blocks proposed by its Algorand Address over a past period of blocks.

### xGov Committee

An xGov Committee is a group of eligible xGovs that have acquired voting power in a block period.

An xGov Committee is defined by the following parameters:

- xGov Registry creation block `Bc` (`uint64`);

> - Inception period `I` (`uint64`), is the number of blocks, after `Bc`, dedicated to the initial xGov Registry acknowledgement by the xGovs;

Reviewer: This is more of a process thing, not a requirement.

2. Collect all the _eligible_ xGovs in the range `[Bc + I; Bf]` to build the `eligible_xgovs` list by:
    - Adding to the list all xGov with a _subscription_ acknowledgements on the xGov Registry in the range;
    - Removing from the list all xGov with a _unsubscription_ acknowledgements on the xGov Registry in the range;

3. Filter `potential_committee` ∩ `eligible_xgovs` to obtain the final `committee`.

### Representation

The xGov Committee selection **MUST** result in a JSON with following schema:

```json
{
  "title": "xGov Committee",
  "description": "Selected xGov Committee with voting power and validity",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "xGovs": {
      "description": "xGovs with voting power, sorted lexicographically with respect to addresses",
      "type": "array",
      "items": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "address": {
            "description": "xGov address used on xGov Registry",
            "type": "string"

>           },

Reviewer: @tasosbit should we specify an encoding for the `address`?

Author: @cusma, can we still pursue even with your question pending?

          "votes": {
            "description": "xGov voting power",
            "type": "number"
          }
        },
        "required": ["address", "votes"]
      },
      "uniqueItems": true
    },
    "inceptionPeriod": {
      "description": "Number of blocks after the xGov Registry creation block, reserved to the first xGov onboarding",
      "type": "number"

>     },

Reviewer: See previous comment.

    "registryCreation": {
      "description": "The xGov Registry creation block",
      "type": "number"

>     },

Reviewer: Not needed if we add the `registryId` (which is better).

    "periodStart": {
      "description": "First block of the Committee selection period, must ≡ 0 mod 1,000,000 and greater than registryCreation + inceptionPeriod",
      "type": "number"
    },
    "periodEnd": {
      "description": "Last block of the Committee selection period, must ≡ 0 mod 1,000,000 and greater than periodStart",
      "type": "number"
    },

>     "members": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "totalMembers": {
```

      "description": "Total number of Committee members",
      "type": "number"
    },

>     "votes": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "totalVotes": {
```

>     "votes": {

Reviewer: Pedantic: `ledgerGenesisHash` (since the Genesis is a property of the Ledger, strictly speaking).

      "description": "Total number of Committee votes",
      "type": "number"
    }
  },

>   "required": ["xGovs", "periodStart", "periodEnd", "members", "votes"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "required": ["networkGenesisHash", "periodEnd", "periodStart", "registryId", "totalMembers", "totalVotes", "xGovs"],
```

Reviewer: All the fields are required (I’ve sorted them lexicographically here for convenience).

  "additionalProperties": false
}
```

The xGovs arrays **MUST** be sorted in lexicographical order with respect to address keys. 

An xGov Committee is identified by the following identifier:

`SHA-512/256(arc0086||SHA-512/256(xGov Committee JSON))`

### Trust Model

The Algorand Foundation is responsible for executing the Committee selection algorithm described above. The correctness of the process is auditable post-facto via:

- The block proposers’ history (on-chain)

> - The App call logs to the xGov Registry (on-chain)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The xGov Registry calls and state (on-chain)
```

---
arc: 86
title: xGov status and voting power
description: xGov status and voting power for the Algorand Governance
author: Stéphane Barroso (@SudoWeezy), Adriana Belotti, Michele Treccani, Cosimo Bassi
discussions-to: https://github.com/algorandfoundation/ARCs/issues/345
status: Draft
type: Meta
created: 2025-06-25
---

## Abstract

This ARC defines the Expert Governor (xGov) status and voting power in the Algorand Expert Governance.

## Specification

The key words "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**", "**SHALL NOT**", "**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**", "**MAY**", and "**OPTIONAL**" in this document are to be interpreted as described in <a href="https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt">RFC-2119</a>.

### xGov Status

> xGovs, or Expert Governors, are decision makers in the Algorand Expert Governance, who acquire voting power by demonstrating an enduring commitment to the Algorand ecosystem, and whose interests are aligned with the common good of the Algorand blockchain.

Reviewer 2: Can we change this paragraph to: 
xGovs, or Expert Governors, are decision makers in the Algorand Expert Governance, who acquire voting power by securing the network and producing blocks.

### xGov Committee

xGov Committees are responsible for voting on proposals.

xGov Committee selection and the assignment of their voting power is performed by the Algorand Foundation, based on the selection criteria defined by this ARC.

The current xGov Committee is assigned to Proposals upon finalization.

An xGov Committee is characterized by the following parameters:

- xGov onboarding inception period *I (uint64)*
- xGov Registry creation block *Bc (uint64)*
- Committee period start *Bi (uint64)* — MUST be 0 mod 1 000 000 and *Bi ≥ Bc + I*
- Committee period end *Bf (uint64)* — MUST be 0 mod 1 000 000 and *Bf > Bi*
- Selected xGovs list with their *addresses (bytes[32])* and *votes (uint64)*
- *Total committee members (uint64)* — MUST equal the length of the xGovs list
- *Total committee votes (uint64)* — MUST equal the sum of votes in the xGovs list

### Committee Selection Algorithm

> To determine the xGov Committee for a given voting period:
> 
> 1. Define:
>    - `I`: onboarding inception period (in blocks)
>    - `Bc`: block where xGov Registry is created
>    - `Bi`: committee period start, MUST satisfy `Bi ≥ Bc + I` and `Bi = 0 mod 1_000_000`
>    - `Bf`: committee period end, MUST satisfy `Bf > Bi` and `Bf = 0 mod 1_000_000`
> 
> 2. Collect all block proposers in `[Bi, Bf]` → Potential Committee
> 
> 3. Extract xGov Subscriptions and xGov Unsubscriptions app calls to the Registry in `[Bc + I, Bf]`
>    - Compute `hands_up_list` and `hands_down_list`
>    - Derive xGov List as the delta between the two at `Bf`
> 
> 4. Filter `potential_committee` ∩ `xgov_list` → final `committee`
> 
> The Algorand Foundation commits to publishing the committee hash and associated metadata within a safe operational margin `S` blocks after `Bf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the xGov Committee parameters `(I, Bc, Bi, Bf)`, the selection is executed with the following procedure:

1. Collect all proposed blocks in the range `[Bi; Bf]` to build the `potential_committee` (note that not all the Block Proposers are eligible as xGov). For each Block Proposer address in the `potential_committee`, assign a voting power equal to the number of blocks proposed in the range `[Bi; Bf]`.

2. Collect all the _eligible_ xGovs in the range `[Bc + I; Bf]` to build the `eligible_xgovs` list by:
    - Adding to the list all xGov with a _subscription_ acknowledgements on the xGov Registry in the range;
    - Removing from the list all xGov with a _unsubscription_ acknowledgements on the xGov Registry in the range;

3. Filter `potential_committee` ∩ `eligible_xgovs` to obtain the final `committee`.
```

> ### Requirement to become an xGov
> 
> An xGov **MUST** have an Algorand address
> 
> The xGov Committee selection is based on a "backward accountability"
> A snapshot of past block proposers is taken, every *Br* blocks to select the xGov Commiittee.
> 
> Any Block Proposer in the past *[Bi; Bf]* block range could be selected as a member of the xGov Committee. (with the exclusion of the Algorand Foundation).
> 
> Block Proposer **MUST** have been register before the Final blocks of a snapshot to be eligible as xGov Committee members.
> 
> ### Voting Power
> 
> The Voting Power of each xGov Commmittee is calculated independently.
> 
> 1. Block proposers of past *Br* block are listed, couting 1 vote per proposed block (*Br* = *Vb*).
> 2. Votes associated with blocks proposed by the Algorand Foundation (*Va*) are deducted
> 3. The voting power of the xGov Committee is *V* = *Vb* - *Va*
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

          }
        },
        "required": ["address", "votes"]
      },
      "uniqueItems": true
    },
    "inceptionPeriod": {
      "description": "Number of blocks after the xGov Registry creation block, reserved to the first xGov onboarding",
      "type": "number"
    },
    "registryCreation": {
      "description": "The xGov Registry creation block",
      "type": "number"
    },
    "periodStart": {
      "description": "First block of the Committee selection period, must ≡ 0 mod 1,000,000 and greater than registryCreation + inceptionPeriod",
      "type": "number"
    },
    "periodEnd": {
      "description": "Last block of the Committee selection period, must ≡ 0 mod 1,000,000 and greater than periodStart",
      "type": "number"
    },
    "members": {
      "description": "Total number of Committee members",
      "type": "number"
    },
    "votes": {
      "description": "Total number of Committee votes",
      "type": "number"
    }
  },
  "required": ["xGovs", "periodStart", "periodEnd", "members", "votes"],
  "additionalProperties": false
}
```

The xGovs arrays **MUST** be sorted in lexicographical order with respect to address keys. 

> An xGov Committee is identified by the following ID:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

An xGov Committee is identified by the following identifier:
```
